# Topographic stresses and the Wenchuan earthquake

## Abstract

## Introduction
Stress is of fundamental importance to many processes in the earth. During
deformation, both the isotropic (pressure) and anisotropic (shear) components
of stress exert control on the deformation state of the earth at any point in
the brittle regime. However, unlike other fundamental quantities such as
temperature, stress is typically difficult to measure *in situ*. Therefore,
stress is often treated in a semi-quantitative manner, with an emphasis on
directions and relative magnitudes of the principal stresses locally or
regionally. These values are commonly derived from strain, for example from
studies of earthquake focal mechanisms or geodetic velocity fields.

In areas of substantial relief, high terrain and steep slopes generate
proportionally large pressures and shear stresses in the crust beneath and
adjacent to the high topography. Because of the irregularity of topography in
mountainous regions, the stresses produced by topography are heterogeneous as
well, and may play a prominent role in local or regional deformation,
particularly if the region is tectonically active. For example, shear and
normal stresses on a fault from topographic loading may push a particular fault
closer to or farther from failure, or reorient the net shear stress direction
on a fault. These effects may affect the localization or deformational style in
a region.  Furthermore, heterogeneous topographic stresses on a particular
fault may affect the way earthquake ruptures propagate across the fault plane.

Though topographic stresses may be very heterogeneous, they may also be
precisely estimated, because topography and material parameters (such as
density) of constituent rocks are very well known compared to many other
parameters of interest. Therefore, in areas where topographic stresses are
a significant component of the total stress budget, these stresses may be used
in conjuction with information on the deformational condition of a location to
place quantitative constraints on other types of stresses and related
parameters such as fault friction and pore fluid pressure.

In this work, we study the effects of topographic stresses on the faults that
ruptured in the 2008 Wenchuan, China earthquake. This earthquake is an ideal
candidate for study because it occurred at the base of the Longmen Shan, one of
the largest and steepest escarpments on Earth, and has a well-studied coseismic
slip distribution displaying significant along-strike changes in kinematics
that may be caused by changes in topographic shear stress along the fault.
Additionally, because the earthquake occurred after ~2000 years of seismic
quiescence, postseismic stresses in the lithosphere are likely to be
negligable, suggesting that the stress state on the faults at the time of
rupture can be described as the sum of topographic, lithostatic, and
accumulated tectonic stresses. This allows us to use the Mohr-Coulomb failure
criterion to bracket the tectonic stress field, pore fluid pressure, and
friction on the fault at failure.

## Previous work on topographic stresses
Aspects of the topographic stresses and their relevance to tectonics have been
studied for some time. Jeffreys [1924] noted that the presence of high
mountains is evidence that the Earth's crust can support significant
heterogeneous differential stresses over long time periods[,placing bounds on
its rheology?]. Dalmayrac and Molnar [1981] and Molnar and Lyon-Caen [1988]
discussed how extensional deformation in the high parts of orogens temporally
coincident with contractional deformation at the low-elevation margins of the
orogen may be explained by a spatially invariant depth-integrated horizontal
compressive stress with spatially varying vertical stress field caused by
topographic variation. Richardson and Coblentz [1994] exploited this
relationship in the central Andes to estimate horizontal tectonic stresses
through finite element modeling, Copley et al [2009] performed similar work in
Albania.  Bollinger et al [2004] showed how increased normal stress on the
Main Himalayan thrust due to loading of the high Himalayan massifs locally
suppressed microseismicity and increased fault locking.

Aspects of topographic stresses are also found in common models of orogenic
dynamics. For example, thin viscous sheet models [refs] for lithospheric deformation
incorporate the ideas of constant horizontal stress with variable vertical stress
due to topographic variation. Critical taper models for thrust or extensional
wedges [e.g. Dahlen, 1990; Xiao et al. 1991] incorporate both variation in
vertical stress due to changing elevation as well as a shear stress contributed
by the slope of the wedge surface.

The contributions of irregular topography to the full stress field
(not simply the vertical stress) in the elastic upper crust has been studied
on smaller spatial scales. McTigue and Mei [1981] and Savage and Swolfs [1986]
investigated the stress components from long, symmetric ridges and showed how
horizontal tension is induced under ridge crests and horizontal compression
is induced under valleys, mostly due to shear stresses generated by slopes.
[martel sackung]
